[[sec_enlive]]
=== Templating HTML with Enlive
[role="byline"]
by Luke VanderHart

==== Problem

You want to create HTML dynamically based on a template, without using
traditional mixed-code or DSL style templating.

==== Solution

Use Enlive, a Clojure library that takes a selector based approach to
templating HTML. Unlike other template frameworks like PHP, ERB, JSP
et al, it doesn't mix code and text. And unlike systems like Haml or
Hiccup, it doesn't use specialized DSLs. Instead, templates are plain
old HTML files, and Enlive uses Clojure code to target specific areas
for replacement or duplication based on incoming data.

To follow along with this recipe, start a REPL using +lein-try+:

[source,shell]
----
$ lein try enlive
---- 

To begin, create a file _post.html_ to serve as an Enlive template.

NOTE: Place this file in the _resources/_ directory, if you're using enlive in the context of a project.

._post.html_
[source,html]
----
<html>
  <head><title>Page Title</title></head>
  <body>
    <h1>Page Title</h1>
    <h3>By <span class="author">Mickey Mouse</span></h3>
    <div class="post-body">
      Lorem ipsum etc...
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
----

The following Clojure code defines an Enlive template based on the contents of _post.html_.

[source,clojure]
----
(require '[net.cgrand.enlive-html :as html])

;; define the template
(html/deftemplate post-page "post.html"
  [post]
  [:title] (html/content (:title post))
  [:h1] (html/content (:title post))
  [:span.author] (html/content (:author post))
  [:div.post-body] (html/content (:body post)))

;; some sample data
(def sample-post {:author "Luke VanderHart"
                  :title "Why Clojure Rocks"
                  :body "Functional programming!"})
----

To apply the template to the data, invoke the function defined by
+deftemplate+. Since it returns a sequence of strings, in most
applications you'll probably want to concatenate the results into a
single string.

[source,clojure]
----
(reduce str (post-page sample-post))
----

.Formatted Output
[source,html]
----
<html>
  <head><title>Why Clojure Rocks</title></head>
  <body>
    <h1>Why Clojure Rocks</h1>
    <h3>By <span class="author">Luke VanderHart</span></h3>
    </h3><div class="post-body">Functional programming!</div>
  </body>
</html>
----

See the discussion section below for a detail explanation of the
+deftemplate+ macro and what is actually happening in this code.

===== Repeating Elements

The above code simply replaces the values of certain nodes in the
emitted HTML. In real scenarios, another common task is to _repeat_
certain items from input HTML, one repetition for each item in the
input data. Enlive provides _snippets_ for this task -- selections
from an input HTML which can then be repeated as many times as desired
in the output of another template.

[source,clojure]
----
(def sample-post-list
  [{:author "Luke VanderHart"
    :title "Why Clojure Rocks"
    :body "Functional programming!"}
   {:author "Ryan Neufeld"
    :title "Clojure Community Management"
    :body "Programmers are like..."}
   {:author "Rich Hickey"
    :title "Programming"
    :body "You're doing it completely wrong."}])

(html/defsnippet post-snippet "post.html"
  {[:h1] [[:div.post-body (html/nth-of-type 1)]]}
  [post]
  [:h1] (html/content (:title post))
  [:span.author] (html/content (:author post))
  [:div.post-body] (html/content (:body post)))

(html/deftemplate all-posts-page "post.html"
  [post-list]
  [:title] (html/content "All Posts")
  [:body] (html/content (map post-snippet post-list)))
----

Invoking the defined +all-posts-page+ function now returns an HTML
page populated with all three sample posts:

[source,clojure]
----
(reduce str (all-posts-page sample-post-list))
----

.Formatted Output
[source,html]
----
<html>
  <head><title>All Posts</title></head>
  <body>
    <h1>Why Clojure Rocks</h1>
    <h3>By <span class="author">Luke VanderHart</span></h3>
    <div class="post-body">Functional programming!</div>
    <h1>Clojure Community Management</h1>
    <h3>By <span class="author">Ryan Neufeld</span></h3>
    <div class="post-body">Programmers are like...</div>
    <h1>Programming</h1>
    <h3>By <span class="author">Rich Hickey</span></h3>
    <div class="post-body">You're doing it completely wrong.</div>
  </body>
</html>
----

In this example, the +defsnippet+ macro defines a snippet over a range
of elements in the input HTML, from the +<h1>+ element to the +<div
class="post-body">+.

Then, the +deftemplate+ for +all-posts-page+ uses the result of
mapping +post-snippet+ over the content of the +body+ element. Since
there are three posts in the sample input data, the snippet is
evaluated three times, and there are three posts output in the
resulting HTML.

==== Discussion

Enlive can be slightly difficult to get the hang of, compared to some
other libraries. There are several contributing factors to
this:

- It has a more novel conceptual approach than other templating systems
  (although it bears a lot of similarity to some other non-Clojure
  templating techniques, such as XSLT).
- It utilizes functional programming techniques to the fullest,
  including liberal use of higher order functions.
- It's a large library, capable of many things. The subset of features
  required to accomplish a particular task is not always extremely
  evident.

In general, the best way to get past these issues and experience the
power and flexibility that Enlive can provide is to understand all the
different parts individually, and what they actually do. Then,
composing them into useful templating systems becomes more manageable.

===== Enlive and the DOM

First of all, it is important to understand that Enlive does not
operate on HTML text directly. Instead, it first parses the HTML into
a Clojure data structure representing the DOM (document object model.)
For example, the HTML fragment:

[source,html]
----
<div id="foo">
  <span class="bar">Hello!</span>
</div>
----

Would be parsed into the Clojure data:

[source,clojure]
----
{:tag :html,
  :attrs nil,
  :content
  ({:tag :body,
    :attrs nil,
    :content
    ({:tag :div,
      :attrs {:id "foo"},
      :content
      ({:tag :span, :attrs {:class "bar"}, :content ("Hello!")})})})}
----

This is more verbose, but it is easier to manipulate from Clojure. You
won't necessarily have to deal with these data structures directly,
but be aware that anywhere Enlive says operates on an element or a
node, it means a the Clojure data stucture for the element, not the
HTML string.

===== Templates

The most important element of these examples is the +deftemplate+
macro. +deftemplate+ takes a symbol as a name, a classpath-relative
path to an HTML file, an argument list, and a series of _selector_ and
_transform function_ pairs. It emits a function, bound to the same
name and of the specified arguments, which, when called, will return
the resulting html as a sequence of strings.

An Enlive _selector_ is a Clojure data structure that identifies a
specific node in the input HTML file. They are similar to CSS
selectors in operation, although somewhat more capable. In this
example, `[:title]` selects each +<title>+ element, `[:span.author]`
each +<span>+ with +class="author"+, etc. More selector forms are
described later on in this section.

A template _transform function_ takes an Enlive node and returns a
modified node. This example uses Enlive's +content+ utility function,
which returns a function that swaps the contents of a node with the
value given as its argument.

The return value is not itself a string, but a sequence of strings,
each one a small fragment of HTML code. This allows the underlying
data structure to be transformed to a string representation
lazily. For simplicity, this example just reduces the string
concatnation function +str+ across the results, but this is actually
not optimally performant. To build a string most efficiently, use the
java +StringBuilder+ class, which uses mutable state to build up a
String object with the best possible performance. Alternatively,
forego the use of Strings altogether and pipe the result seq of the
template function directly into an output +Writer+, which most web
application libraries (including Ring) can use as the body of an HTTP
response, which is the most common destination for templated HTML.

===== Selectors

Enlive selectors are data structures that identify one or more HTML
nodes. They describe a _pattern_ of data - if the pattern matches any
nodes in the HTML data structure, then the node is will be selected by
the selector. A selector may select one, many or zero nodes from a
given HTML document depending on how many matches the pattern has.

The full reference for valid selector forms is quite complex, and
beyond the scope of this recipe to describe fully. See the formal
selector http://enlive.cgrand.net/syntax.html[specification] for
complete documentation.

However, the following selector patterns should be sufficient to get
you started:

- `[:div]` selects all +<div>+ element nodes.

- `[:div.sidebar]` selects all +<div>+ element nodes with a CSS class
  of "sidebar".

- `[:div#summary]` selects the +<div>+ element with an HTML ID of
  "summary".

- `[:p :span]` selects all +<span>+ elements that are descendants of
  +<p>+ elements.

- `[:div.menu :ul :li :span]` selects only +<span>+ elements inside a +<li>+
  element inside a +<ul>+ element inside a +<div>+ element with a CSS
  style of "menu".

- `[[:div (nth-child 2)]]` selects +<div>+ elements that are the
  second child of their parent element. The double square brackets are
  not a typo - the inner vector is used to denote a logical _and_
  condition. In this case, the matched element must be a div, AND the
  +nth-child+ predicate must hold true.

Other predicates besides +nth-child+ are available, as well as the
ability to define custom predicates. See the Enlive documentation for
more details.

Finally, there is a special type of selector called a _range_ selector
which is not specified by a vector, but by a map literal (in curly
braces.) The range selector contains two other selectors, and
inclusively matches all the nodes between the two matched nodes, in
document order. The starting node is in key position in the map
literal, and the ending node is in value position, so the selector
+{[:.foo] [:.bar]}+ will match all nodes between nodes with an id of
"foo" and an id of "bar".

The primary example above uses a range selector in the +defsnippet+
form to select all the nodes that are part of the same logical blog
post, even though they aren't wrapped in a common parent element.

===== Snippets

A snippet is similar to a template, in that it produces a function
based on a base HTML file. However, they have two major differences
from templates.

1. Rather than always rendering the entire HTML file like a template
does, snippets render only a portion of the input HTML. The portion to
be rendered is specified by an Enlive selector passed as the third
argument to the +defsnippet+ macro, right after the name and the path
to the HTML file.

2. The return values of the emitted functions are Enlive data
structures rather than HTML strings. This means that the results of
rendering a snippet can be returned directly from the transform
function of a template or another snippet. This is where Enlive starts
to show its power; snippets can be recycled and re-used extensively
and in different combinations.

Other than these differences, the +defsnippet+ form is identical to
+deftemplate+, and after the selector the rest of the arguments are
the same - an argument vector and a series of selector and transform
function pairs.

===== Using Enlive for scraping

Because of its emphasis on selectors and use of plain, unannotated
HTML files, Enlive is also extremely useful not just for templating
and producing HTML but for parsing and scraping data from HTML from
any source.

To use Enlive to extract data from HTML, you must first parse the HTML
file into an Enlive data structure. To do this, invoke the
+net.cgrand.enlive-html/html-resource+ function on the HTML file. You
may specify the file as a +java.net.URL+, a +java.io.File+, or a
string indicating a classpath-relative path. The function will return
the parsed Enlive data structure representing the HTML DOM.

Then, you can use the +net.cgrand.enlive-html/select+ function to
apply a selector to the DOM and extract specific data. Given a node
and a selector, +select+ will return only the matched nodes. You can
then use the +net.cgrand.enlive-html/text+ function to retrieve the
text content of a node.

For example, the following function will return a sequence of the most
recent N comic titles in the XKCD archives:

[source,clojure]
----
(defn comic-titles
  [n]
  (let [dom (html/html-resource
             (java.net.URL. "http://xkcd.com/archive"))
        title-nodes (html/select dom [:#middleContainer :a])
        titles (map html/text title-nodes)]
    (take n titles)))

(comic-titles 5)
;; -> ("Oort Cloud" "Git Commit" "New Study"
       "Telescope Names" "Job Interview")
----

===== When to use Enlive

As an HTML templating system, Enlive has two primary value
propositions over its alternatives in the Clojure ecosystem.

First, the templates are pure HTML. This makes it much easier to work
with HTML designers, who can hand their HTML mockups directly to a
developer without having to deal with inline markup code, and
developers can use them directly without manually slicing them
(outside of code, that is.) Furthermore, the templates themselves can
be viewed in a browser statically, meaning they can serve as their own
wireframes. This eliminates the burden of keeping a web project's
visual prototypes in sync with the code.

Secondly, because it uses real Clojure functions and data structures
instead of a custom DSL, Enlive exposes the full power of the Clojure
language. There are very few situations where you should feel limited
by Enlive's capabilities, since it is always possible to extend it
using only standard Clojure functions and macros, operating on familar
persistent, immutable data structures.

==== See Also

- The Enlive https://github.com/cgrand/enlive/wiki[documentation]
- David Nolen's https://github.com/swannodette/enlive-tutorial[tutorial]
- The Enlive https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/enlive-clj[mailing list].
- Alternative templating libraries Hiccup (<<sec_hiccup>>) and Selmer
  (<<sec_webapps_templating_with_selmer>>).
