=== Introduction

Now that we've got primitives out of the way, we need to start doing
something with them. Single atomic values are great and all, but
things get much more interesting when we start globbing them all
together. As you'll see soon enough, data manipulation is one of
Clojure's strong suits.

What makes Clojure so good at manipulating collections? It comes down
to three things: _immutability_, _persistence_ and the _sequence_
abstraction. Every one of Clojure's built-in collection types have these
properties and are thus unified in their API's appearance and
behavior.

As the great Alan J. Perlis put it:

[quote, Alan J. Perlis, Early Computer Science Pioneer]
____
It is better to have 100 functions operate on one data structure than
to have 10 functions operate on 10 data structures.
____

This chapter introduces Clojure collections and where/how to use them.
Finally, we wrap things up by showing you how to build your own
feature-complete types that look and behave just like the rest of
Clojure's collections, by leveraging Clojure's capacity for interface
polymorphism.

==== Immutability

Immutability means that a Clojure data structure, once created, can
never change. You can only "modify" an immutable data structure by
creating a *new* data structure which is a copy of the old, with the
desired changes in place.

Immutability means that Clojure data structures, however deeply
nested, are simple _values_, just like the number +3+ or the character
+\z+. It doesn't make sense to speak of "changing" the value of +3+ -
it just is. If you "change" it by, say, incrementing it, you don't
modify +3+ itself. Instead, you end up with an entirely new and
different value, +4+. Clojure extends this notion of value to all data
structures. In Clojure, any action which in another language would
perform any kind of update on a data structure will instead return an
entirely new one. You can continue to pass around and use both the old
and the new versions with confidence, knowing that nothing you can do
will cause any unintended change elsewhere in your program.

This feature is extremely important in concurrent and parallel
programming, where unexpected mutation is the source of a large class
of bugs. With immutable data, any number of threads can read from the
same data without any worrying about locks or race conditions - it's
always safe to read something that can't change. "Clone" operations
are not only free, but unnecessary.

==== Persistence

But, you may ask, how can that possibly be efficient? Surely it is
impractical to do a full copy of an object every time you need to add
something?

Yes, it would be, except for the feature of _persistence_. Persistence
means that Clojure's data structures, although logically immutable,
can still share pieces of their internal structure for efficiency in
both time and space. Essentially, updated versions of immutable data
only need to store the deltas from pervious versions, rather than
doing a full deep copy.

To make it performant, all of this uses some extremely clever
algorithms, of course - see the book "Purely Functional Data
Structures" by Chris Okasaki for a detailed description of how they
work.

==== The Sequence Abstraction

From vectors, maps, sets and lists to strings and streams, every last
one of Clojure's collections behave in a similar, predictable fashion;
simple tools for a more civilized age. This is on account of Clojure's
sequence abstraction.

The wide-array of collection manipulating functions in Clojure are all
implemented in terms of one simple abstraction; every collection can
be treated as a sequence of values. By implementing +first+, +rest+
and +cons+ any data structure--even ones you build yourself--can
participate in the +ISeq+ interface.

Then, you can use Clojure's huge library of functions that can operate
on sequences, with *any* of the data structures. All of functional
programming's best-beloved functions (+map+, +reduce+, +filter+, etc)
will work interchangably on any data structure. In essence, the
sequence abstraction allows all the expressiveness of traditional
list-based LISP programming without forcing you to actually use lists
Instead, use whatever type is most efficient for the task, knowing
that you can consume them all in the same way when it makes sense to
do so.
